\input texinfo.tex     @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename circe.info
@settitle Circe
@afourpaper
@comment %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} Jorgen Sch@"afer

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A
copy of the license is included in the file @file{COPYING.GFDL}.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* circe:: A Client for IRC in Emacs
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Circe
@subtitle A Client for IRC in Emacs
@author Jorgen Sch@"afer

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node top, Quick Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Circe: A Client for IRC in Emacs

Circe is a client for Internet Relay Chat, or IRC, which is a chat
protocol widely used in the computing world.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Quick Introduction::          
* Concepts::                    
* Commands::                    
* Configuration::               
* Extension Modules::           
* Design Decisions::            
@end menu

@node Quick Introduction, Concepts, top, top
@chapter Quick Introduction

@menu
* Installation::                
* Connecting to IRC::           
* Example Configuration::       
@end menu

@node Installation, Connecting to IRC, Quick Introduction, Quick Introduction
@section Installation

Circe is distributed as a tar ball containing a few files. To install
her, you need to unpack it, tell Emacs where it can find the files, and
load the package.

Let's say you unpacked the Circe distribution files into the directory
@file{~/.elisp/circe/}. The following lines belong into your
@file{~/.emacs}. The first line tells Emacs where to find the Circe
files, and the second tells it to load Circe. She does not connect yet,
though.

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/.elisp/circe")
(require 'circe)
@end lisp

If you are using XEmacs, you should use the following @code{require}
line instead of the one above:

@lisp
(require 'circe-xemacs)
@end lisp


@node Connecting to IRC, Example Configuration, Installation, Quick Introduction
@section Connecting to IRC

Once Circe is loaded (@pxref{Installation}), it is easy to connect to an
IRC server. The command is @kbd{M-x circe}. She will ask you for the
server and port to connect to. Good servers to try at the beginning are
@code{irc.freenode.net}, port @code{6667}---you can join the channel
@code{#emacs} there. To join the channel, just type @kbd{/JOIN #emacs}
in the initial Circe buffer (the server buffer, @pxref{Concepts}).


@node Example Configuration,  , Connecting to IRC, Quick Introduction
@section Example Configuration

The following documents a sample Circe configuration for your
@file{~/.emacs}. The comments try to elaborate what is done here.

@lisp
;;; Tell Emacs how to load Circe when needed
(require 'circe-auto)

;;; The following file contains our nickserv password for Freenode, very
;;; probably by doing something like:
;;; (setq freenode-passwd "t!n3be") ; There Is No Editor But Emacs
(load-file "~/.private.el")

(setq ;;; On Freenode, automatically join the channel #emacs
      circe-server-auto-join-channels '(("^freenode$" "#emacs"))
      ;;; Also use our Nickserv password on Freenode
      circe-nickserv-passwords `(("freenode" ,freenode-passwd))
      ;;; Truncate long buffers to conserve memory.
      lui-max-buffer-size 30000
      ;;; Also, do spell checking. This only works when you have ispell
      ;;; installed.
      lui-flyspell-p t
      ;;; When we kill the server buffer, ask, and if we insist, kill
      ;;; all other buffers belonging to that server as well
      circe-server-killed-confirmation 'ask-and-kill-all)

;;; Now define a M-x irc command to connect to IRC.
(defun irc ()
  "Connect to IRC"
  (interactive)
  (circe "irc.freenode.net" 6667 "freenode"))
@end lisp

Now when you re-load your @file{~/.emacs}, or restart Emacs, you can
just do @kbd{M-x irc} to connect to Freenode and join the channel
@code{#emacs}.


@node Concepts, Commands, Quick Introduction, top
@chapter Concepts

@menu
* Quick Introduction to IRC::   
* Circe Concepts::              
@end menu

@node Quick Introduction to IRC, Circe Concepts, Concepts, Concepts
@section Quick Introduction to IRC

An IRC network consists of servers which are connected to each
other@footnote{Some disagree and argue that an IRC network is not an IRC
network unless the server are disconnected to each other.} in a tree
structure. There are many IRC networks out there, for example Freenode,
IRCnet and EFnet. Those networks are never connected to each other, and
provide different features.

Ever user on an IRC network has a unique @dfn{nickname}. This nickname,
or @dfn{nick} for short, is used for most IRC commands to identify a
person.

Once connected to a server, and, transitively, to a network, you can
join a channel. A @dfn{channel} is the main way to communicate with
others on IRC. Different people can join a channel and talk on it.
Everything said on the channel is visible to all participants. Channels
exist on various topics, though it is not uncommon for the people on a
channel to diverge widely from the actual topic implied by the name of
the channel. An example channel is @code{#emacs} on Freenode, which
exists to provide help with Emacs, but has seen discussions ranging from
the issues of Free Software, to WikiWikiWeb design, to detailed analyses
of Marx and Kropotkin.

To talk on a channel, just write what you want to say. If you want to
address someone specifically, for example as an answer to a question, it
is custom to prefix the message with the nick followed by a colon, like
this:

@verbatim
Glaucos: Have you seen Scylla recently?
@end verbatim

@node Circe Concepts,  , Quick Introduction to IRC, Concepts
@section Circe Concepts

When Circe connects to an IRC server, she creates a @dfn{server buffer}
which is dedicated only to this server. Rarely any output is sent via
this buffer, but it is initially the only indication of an IRC
connection. Most @ref{Commands}, especially @code{JOIN}, do work in the
server buffer as well, though.

As soon as you join a channel, Circe creates a @dfn{channel buffer} for
you, which will contain all data received from or sent to this channel.

For private messages, Circe creates a @dfn{query buffer}, which is
dedicated to the conversation with a single other individual. Circe
tries to keep track of the nick of that individual.

The channel in channel buffers and the other nick in query buffers is
usually called the @dfn{target} of this buffer.

Any text typed at the input line of any Circe buffer is sent as a
message to the target. In a channel, this means you send this as a
message to the channel; in a query, this is sent as a private message to
the corresponding nick. But when the line starts with a slash, it is
considered to be a command. See the next section, @ref{Commands}.

Circe uses the Linewise User Interface, @xref{Top, Lui, Lui}, for all
output. This means that all the configuration options of Lui apply to
Circe as well.


@node Commands, Configuration, Concepts, top
@chapter Commands

A line starting with a slash (@kbd{/}) is a command to Circe, and not
sent as a message to the server. The word immediately following the
slash is called the command word, or command for short. Following is a
description of all the commands Circe knows so far.

@deffn Command SAY text
Say @var{text} to the current target. This is useful to prevent a
misinterpretation of a slash at the beginning of a line.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ME action
Tell the current channel that you are doing @var{action}. This is
usually displayed to others as follows (where @code{padawan} is your
nick):

@example
> /me smiles at the people in the channel.
* padawan smiles at the people in the channel.
@end example

This command can be confusing, as correct sentences using it require
thinking of yourself in the third person. It is not uncommon among
IRCers to talk about themselves as ``me'', either.
@end deffn

@deffn Command circe-reconnect
A different kind of command, this is called using @kbd{M-x
circe-reconnect}. It reconnects the current IRC session, for example
when your network connection died.
@end deffn


@menu
* Channel Commands::            
* Query Commands::              
* Server Commands::             
* General Commands::            
@end menu

@node Channel Commands, Query Commands, Commands, Commands
@section Channel Commands

Channel commands are primarily useful in channels, or to get onto
channels.

@deffn Command JOIN channel [key]
Join @var{channel}, optionally supplying a @var{key}. Some channels have
a keyword set so that only those in the know can join it. This is rare,
though.
@end deffn

@deffn Command PART [reason]
Leave the current channel. You can give a @var{reason}, too.
@end deffn

@deffn Command NAMES [channel]
Get a list of people on the current channel, or possibly on
@var{channel}. This can also be invoked with @kbd{C-c C-n}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command TOPIC [newtext]
This command retrieves or sets the topic of the current channel. The
topic is a (more or less) long line of text, usually announcing
important URLs or events. It's often a good idea to read it. Many
channels disallow changing the topic unless you have special privileges.
@end deffn

@deffn Command CHTOPIC
Replace the current input line with a command to set the topic as it is
at the moment. This is useful if you want to change the topic slightly.
It is bound to @kbd{C-c C-t} by default.
@end deffn

@deffn Command WL [number]
As has been said before, the IRC server are connected as a tree. This
means that when two IRC servers lose the connection, there remain two
disconnected parts of the tree. This is called a @dfn{netsplit}. When
the servers connect again, it's called a @dfn{netmerge}. So far, so bad,
but the typical netsplit will cause about half the channel to apparently
quit IRC (they will see you, and all that stay on your ``side'' of the
split, quit as well). Shortly thereafter, the net merges, and all the
people who just quitted will rejoin the channel automatically. This
causes an annoying amount of text which disturbs channel talks.

When Circe detects a netsplit, she does not report every person leaving,
but instead records that they split away. When the net merges again, she
notes that as well. All you will see about this is a notice that the net
is splitting or merging. The command @code{WL}, for Who Left, will tell
you which users left the channel due to the split, and are still
missing.
@end deffn


@node Query Commands, Server Commands, Channel Commands, Commands
@section Query Commands

Query commands are primarily useful to open a query, that is, a private
discussion with someone else.

@deffn Command MSG nick text
Send @var{nick} a message containing @var{text}. This is equivalent to
opening (or switching to) a query buffer for this person, and typing
@var{text} at the prompt.
@end deffn

@deffn Command QUERY nick
Open a query buffer for user @var{nick}.
@end deffn


@node Server Commands, General Commands, Query Commands, Commands
@section Server Commands

Server commands change your status at the server, and have no immediate
effects on other users.

@deffn Command AWAY [reason]
@deffnx Command GAWAY [reason]
This command sets you @dfn{away}, which means you're not available for
talking at the moment. The reason is told to everyone who sends messages
to you, or checks your whois information.

The @code{GAWAY} variant does the same, but on all servers you are
connected to.
@end deffn

@deffn Command BACK
This command removes any away status. It is equivalent to @code{AWAY}
without any arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn Command QUIT [reason]
@deffnx Command GQUIT [reason]
A completely useless command which makes you leave IRC. Since this is
such a completely incomprehensible thing to do, it is very useful to
give a @var{reason} why you did that.

@code{GQUIT} does the same, but on all servers you are on.
@end deffn

@node General Commands,  , Server Commands, Commands
@section General Commands

General commands don't fit anywhere else.

@deffn Command IGNORE [pattern]
Idiots exist everywhere. IRC is everywhere. Consequently, idiots exist
on IRC. When someone annoys you too much, the best thing to do is to
ignore them. This can be done mentally, but Circe can help you a bit.
When a user matches the pattern you pass to this command, messages from
that user are never displayed. Nor are messages displayed which start
out with a word matching such a pattern followed by a colon, comma or
space.

Without the pattern, this command lists your current ignore list. You
can store permanent regular expressions in it by modifying the
@code{circe-ignore-list} variable in your @file{~/.emacs}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command UNIGNORE pattern
When you're in the mood to be annoyed again, you can remove a pattern
from your ignore list again.
@end deffn

@deffn Command PING nick
The net being what it is, it is possible that sometimes a connection is
very slow. How fast someone is receiving your messages can be tested
with this message.
@end deffn

@deffn Command WHOIS nick [nick]
@deffnx Command WHOWAS nick
The @code{WHOIS} returns some information about another user. Just try
it. @code{WHOWAS} is very similar, but works on nicks that are not on
IRC anymore, though it returns less information.
@end deffn

@deffn Command WHOAMI
When you don't see your own nick in messages you send, it is sometimes
quite nice to be remembered who you are again. This command does a
@code{WHOIS} on yourself.
@end deffn

@deffn Command CTCP nick command arguments
@acronym{CTCP} is the Client-To-Client Protocol used on IRC. If you want
to test it, try to send yourself a CTCP message. Possible commands are
@code{VERSION} and @code{TIME}, both of which don't take any arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn Command QUOTE text
Sometimes it is desirable for some people to send IRC commands
themselves. The @code{QUOTE} command just takes its argument and passes
it unmodified to the IRC server.
@end deffn

@deffn Command SV
This command tells the current target the version of Circe and Emacs you
are using. Besides being useful in bragging contests, this also helps in
debugging problems.
@end deffn


@node Configuration, Extension Modules, Commands, top
@chapter Configuration

Circe is quite configurable. Please see the customize group @code{circe}
for a complete list of options: @kbd{M-x customize-group RET circe RET}.
Please refer to the chapter about @ref{Extension Modules}, and of course
the source, for information more suited for developers.


@node Extension Modules, Design Decisions, Configuration, top
@chapter Extension Modules

To extend Circe for other purposes than those features in the core you
have to write an extension module. An example extension module for Circe
can be found in the sources as @file{circe-highlight-all-nicks.el}.

There are only few requirements for extension modules. A hypothetical
@code{grovel} module should be provided in a @file{circe-grovel.el}
file. This file needs to provide the @code{circe-grovel} feature, and
two commands, named @code{enable-circe-grovel} and
@code{disable-circe-grovel}. What those commands do is up to you.

It is also advisable that the enable function be annotated with an
autoloads line.


@node Design Decisions,  , Extension Modules, top
@chapter Design Decisions

The basic design decision behind Circe is the separation of the frontend
or user interface from the backend. The frontend is now called
@xref{Top, Lui, Lui}, the Linewise User Interface, which provides all
user interface related functions behind a clean abstraction layer. The
next step is to separate an IRC library from the rest of Circe, so that
Circe only needs to provide the communication layer between the two.

Circe does not try to find old server or channel buffers when a new
connection attempt is done. Instead, new buffers are created all the
time. If you need to reconnect to a server, use the @kbd{M-x
circe-reconnect} command. In the future, it might be possible to find a
suitable old server buffer which is currently not connected, and use it
to connect to IRC.

The extension modules should not use minor modes. When a number of
modules are loaded, any major mode help buffer is croweded with those
useless minor modes which add no information. The enable/disable
convention of Circe does not clutter the minor mode list.
@bye
